About the work:
The first edition of this course on peer-evaluation with Moodle workshops was taught within the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) University Teacher Training Program (FOPU).
Since then, other teaching centres and faculties have been interested in the face-to-face version as a training action aimed at their teachers.
The good reception after its successive editions and the interest shown by the attendees in having a compilation book of the materials is what encouraged the compilation of this volume.



About the author:
Daniel García González has been a professor of journalism at the UPV/EHU since 2001, where he has taught subjects such as writing, design, business, computer graphics and, currently, journalism technology.  
He has a degree in Advertising and Public Relations as well as in Journalism from the UPV/EHU and in Law from the University of Deusto. He obtained his doctorate with a thesis on computer graphics in the Spanish press and the case of the Bilbao newspaper El Correo, for which he has also worked as a graphic artist and data visualiser.
He is delighted to receive any comments, examples, doubts or suggestions for any improvement you may have:

DANIEL.GARCIA@EHU.EUS





Additional content:
Access more info, forums, Q&A, sample workshops, etc. at:
WWW.TEACHTWICE.NET
 
Origins


The villain of this whole story

At the beginning of this century, when I was still a new teacher and with my teaching vocation still intact -what those times were- two students approached me in the corridor to tell me about a concern. It seemed to have reached their ears that in the other group, in the morning, we were advancing more slowly and therefore less subject was taught than in theirs, in the afternoon. They were therefore 'learning more', so they were concerned that their exam would also end up covering more agenda items and therefore be more demanding than their morning colleagues. So far, nothing new. What I will never forget from that conversation are a couple of words that one of them used to refer to that legitimate interest in the test being balanced, and that is that he suddenly claimed, impassively, his "right to know less" [SIC].

The slip of the tongue would be no more than that, a simple anecdote, were it not for the fact that it showed a much more worrying background. And this is the sad reality that, in the eyes of our students, we are the examiners rather than the teachers. Before their collaborators in the task of learning, their judges and policemen. Would anyone enter a concert, a cinema or a restaurant with a similar attitude? "...Gentlemen, I have already paid the bill but now I demand my right to have the concert, the film screening cancelled or to be fed as little as possible...". What a thing.

And yet, in the classroom this is how it is: when for whatever reason we are forced to shorten a class the general response is one of joy and jubilation. Likewise, if we say the magic phrase "...well, there are still a few minutes left but we'll leave it here for today..." or "...we won't be able to study this section..." we don't know if an angry mob has claimed any right to hurry up the minutes of class until the end or to have the agenda taught in its strict totality.

Harvard professor Eric Mazur defined summative assessment, the exam, as the 'silent killer of learning'. For lustrums I have also visualized him as the villain of history. We are teachers in spite of and against that other role, of policeman and judge, to which we sometimes end up devoting even more time and worry.

Since I discovered computer-assisted co-evaluation, I have regained hope for a full teaching career. Preparing these workshops has put me back to the test intellectually. I now feel that the design of each activity and the writing of each rubric does deserve that time of dedication. I see tangible fruits. That's why through this book I try to simplify the technical part so that it won't be an impediment for those who want to immerse themselves in it and because I firmly believe that a good co-evaluation between peers must transcend technology. Let that not be the obstacle.
 
In brief

What is a peer-assessment workshop?

This is a double task that we ask students to do, since, in addition to handing in their exercise, we also ask them to evaluate how their classmates have done by means of a questionnaire, rubric or guided guidelines prepared by the teacher. We have been doing this in the classroom for a long time, sharing simple paper forms among peers and then calculating the grades manually. Nothing new.

What Moodle gives us

This free and open software not only allows us to do this offline, but it also helps us to put order in the deliveries and subsequent crossings, so that each student can co-evaluate not only one or two of his or her peers but many more, as well as facilitating the collection of feedback from each other and the calculation of grades. In addition to publishing and sharing the results. This could also be done by teachers in an analogical way, but at the cost of a huge effort and a huge dedication of time.

And at what point does it become essential

When, in addition, the machine calculates not only the average grade that each delivery is receiving, but also judges that other evaluation task – it calculates a second grade for each participant – and allows us to detect possible deviations of those reviewers who might be behaving in bad faith or simply lazy. Suddenly it is the group itself that necessarily controls itself. The community of participants, through the accumulation of statistical aggregates, produces grades that are close to those that would be given by the teacher himself, and thus the teacher can be relieved of his usual heteroevaluating role, as a Policeman, to, as a mere supervisor of the process, focus on his pedagogical function. The tens of thousands of calculations needed to achieve this result would be beyond our reach. It would seem that only a computer-assisted workshop of full co-evaluation is possible.

How we tell you in this book:

Each reader will have his or her own needs. Some of you will have already tried to set up a workshop and will come with specific questions, while for the rest it may be completely new. This is why the book starts from scratch, thinking both of those who have never set up a workshop before – so that you can do it step by step – and of those who only come with very specific questions and want to use it as a quick reference manual – the headings and explanations try to replicate the chronological order in which they appear in Moodle, to make it easier to find them.	 
There are two main difficulties in mastering them::

1. Of all those that exist, Moodle is the most widespread learning management system (LMS) in the world because of its enormous versatility and its great speed of operation, but to achieve both it relies precisely on what is also its greatest weakness, a monotonous text-based interface that is hardly user-friendly. For the uninitiated, the names of the headings, the appearance of the menus, the screens, etc. can be somewhat confusing and redundant, which is why it is essential to get used to using it, even more so than 'learning' to use it. Its learning curve is reminiscent of that of a language, for which it is more important than knowing its syntax and internal rules to practice it non stop.

2. But of course, this non-stop practice requires continuous trial and error, a margin that you will have found to be perfectly acceptable for other Moodle tools, in which we can try and make mistakes in private until we are satisfied with the result and then show it to the students. But in the specific case of workshops, where it is essential to have a community of participants who interact continuously to see the progress, we can not afford to fail as often as we would like. If we add to this the fact that it is an activity that crystallizes into a grade – the most sacred thing for the student and therefore always with a certain confrontational nature and interests opposed to those of the teacher – we find ourselves with a snake that bites its own tail: to learn how to use it I have to make mistakes but in this case I cannot afford them because of the transcendence of the workshop itself

That is why I have tried very hard to keep these pages away from the cold manuals usually prepared by educational institutions and the official materials that Moodle makes available to us. On the one hand, this book is nourished by all the mistakes I had to make in my desire to teach more to my students through workshops that would double the effort and dedication invested as a teacher. And on the other hand, from the experience in the course of the same name, Teach Twice, given in different faculties of the University of the Basque Country thanks to the trust given by its Educational Advice Service, which believed in this project from the beginning. The fact is that by resolving the doubts and concerns that you, the participating teachers, have been raising with me, I have been able to learn other perspectives and uses of this tool that would never have occurred to me. 
Workshop advantages and opportunities

The main one is of a pedagogical type. Of the six cognitive levels that we invoke among our students (Memorization, Comprehension, Application, etc. -See Bloom's taxonomy-) it is peaceful among the doctrine that those of Evaluation and Synthesis (creativity) are the closest to Authentic and Transformative Learning. The academy constantly reminds us that through co-evaluation we not only teach more, but also better. We have all thought at one time or another while correcting exercises with our red marker: "Too bad. If they could see these great examples for themselves, how much they would learn" and even reflected on the fact that it is precisely by correcting that we teachers learn the most. In one of the subjects that I had to teach – on journalistic writing – I came to the sad and resounding conclusion that to monopolize that heteroevaluating role and not allow the students to participate in the correction is nothing less than stealing from them that very valuable second opportunity to learn. Let's give them back what's theirs.

The second advantage is the impressive scalability of the tool. Organizing a workshop for 10 students requires a certain amount of dedication, but doing it for 100 or 1,000 students only requires a little more. And as if that weren't enough, once used the first time and debugged, it can be used again and again. From our teaching centres we are urged to design a type of evaluation that is at once formative, continuous and sustainable. The traditional Continuous Assessment based on practical exercises fulfils the first two premises but fails in the third: it is limited by our capacity for dedication and leads us to a model that is difficult to scale or apply to large groups of students. The problem that all teachers face with this demand for 'authentic' assessment is, without exception, the resources: the lack of time... the large number of students..., etc. On the contrary, with the organization of co-evaluation workshops, far from being limited by the size of the group, the system increases in reliability precisely the larger the sample. 

The third is somewhat more subjective: 

After years and years of holding the red marker and correcting the same types of errors over and over again, as in the myth of Sisyphus, the illusion and vocation of teaching necessarily wears out. On the contrary, the construction of a good rubric in which to systematize that decision making that follows each evaluation is a continuous intellectual challenge. Throughout our professional lives we have all come across colleagues with both types of extreme profiles: on the one hand, people who are admirable for their abnegation and enormous capacity for sacrifice in the face of repetitive tasks and, on the other hand, non-conformists who are driven by a desire for innovation and the search for an answer to this eternal challenge: "How far could I get the rock to rise by itself and from what point is it essential that I continue to push it"?

Civilizations – and education – have come this far thanks to citizens – and teachers – of both opposing patterns. And if, for whatever reason, this book has ended up in your hands, it is quite likely that you will opt more for the second one.	 
	Entry barriers

On the other hand, there are also some prior conditions or obstacles that have sometimes led me to discourage some teachers from using workshops.

The first is that the creation of workshops has to be seen as a very profitable investment of time. But, of course, to be able to invest it, it is essential to have it. To try to use them as an emergency solution is to fail to understand how they work. The return on investment is, according to my calculations, from the third or fourth use. If we also include the minutes you are spending right now reading this book, let's say from the fifth. Now, this is a safe return, a guaranteed investment. In a short time you will be needing about three hours of work to produce what used to take you twenty. The word of Bilbao.

The second is that the calculation of the grades and the control of the workshop process will require us, if not certain notions of statistics, at least not to be afraid of percentages. It will not be necessary to be a professor of Probability or Algebra, much less an experienced poker player -note the sequence-, but sometimes we will have to supervise, with a good eye, strings of numbers in order to elucidate, with a certain agility, if flagrant imbalances, evident errors or inverted tendencies are being produced. The functioning of the workshop is based on the reliability that comes from enlarging a sample – when I survey only two individuals the answers may be perfectly valid or totally disparate as a result of chance, however, if I survey twelve, the aggregation of data will begin to come closer to the former. For the same reason, it is much more advisable to carry out five mediocre workshops than to try to achieve a perfect one. This is one of the foundations on which everything that follows rests, so if you were looking for an infallible and totally objective measuring instrument you would have to look in another direction. And equally, for those with an unbeatable allergy to data I would recommend closing the book on this page, giving it to a colleague and returning to the red marker.

The third barrier of entry is the very important temporary conditions of this type of activity, so coral. We teachers tend to have a certain flexibility in the deadlines for the submission of assignments, especially if we can see the good faith of our students. Thus, in exchange for different types of tributes – a small penalty in the grade, a huge smile, a medical certificate, etc. – we tend to cushion these failures. In the end, everything stays at home and we are also interested in maintaining a certain moral legitimacy or that closeness/empathy with the students. And worst of all, these little creatures also take a certain degree of flexibility for granted. Now, when it comes to programming a machine that will logistically organize a small community to co-evaluate itself, things change drastically. Suddenly this is going to work like an airport. The boarding gates may wait a few minutes to pick up that late passenger, but once he has taken off it will be much more difficult for the plane to return for him. And in the case of the workshops – just like the two-hour, two-week or two-month preparations – there will be moments of closure, such as the delivery of the task or the co-evaluation of others, scheduled in advance and which will sometimes clash with that culture of compromise in the time frames to which both students and teachers are accustomed. 


These tensions between the inflexible operation of the machine and the more relaxed operation of the human group will force us -which washing machine in operation has to be stopped to accept that delayed size- to make unpleasant decisions, such as leaving out -for the next washing- certain individuals. My advice here again is to hold more workshops that will give less credit, rather than a single one where everything is decided and it is a drama to deal with tardiness.

The fourth is the difficulty of writing good evaluation rubrics. Although this play explains how to technically set up and use a digital tool, I am sorry to say that this will be the simplest of all. Hommer Simpson said that he only knew "...three kinds of people: those who can count and those who can't...". Well, I only know two types of teachers: those who have not yet been introduced to the design of a rubric and those who already know the enormous difficulties of writing it well. If you're still in the first group, it's urgent that you move on to the second one as soon as possible. And although this is not a book about pedagogy or measuring instruments, nor does it aim to provide a lesson in designing assessment rubrics, from the first chapter I will need to ask you to write at least one [see page 52], because it will condition absolutely everything.  Without it your workshop will have no foundation. It will be built on quicksand. Really. Prepare your signature before everything else. If I had to take a paragraph out of the whole book to burn it, it would certainly be this one.

And one last piece of bad news. In case you hadn't noticed, your students aren't exactly thrilled about having to evaluate their classmates' exercises. Although from a teaching point of view we may feel more involved with our teaching mission or make this extra effort to implement collaborative, innovative and training strategies based on authentic learning... [blah, blah, blah...] be careful. Remember that for your recipients it only translates into one thing: more-car-ga-de-tra-jo. And that's it. If through the workshops you hoped to improve the student satisfaction surveys*, keep in mind that their perception will be just the opposite. More like a scowl... "you're giving us a task that was rightfully yours." Therefore, we will have to continuously convey the opposite message to them, through a communication strategy that makes it clear to them that their teacher is taking this process as seriously as they do and that it does not in any way imply an abandonment of our responsibilities, quite the contrary. We will need to imagine the tasks also from the other side and understand the conflicting interests of all of us with a little empathy and psychological skills.

That said:

I assure you it pays off. You start a fascinating journey. After twenty years dedicated to teaching, sometimes more and sometimes less successful, I have discovered the computer-assisted co-evaluation workshops and now I feel that, for the first time, my time is indeed dedicated to building something really important and that it returns tangible results, week after week.

